# 01/30/2023

## agenda

- Going over the syllabus.
- Review what the class is about.

# 02/06/2023

## agenda

- Languages: Regular, context free, context sensitive.
- Arbitrary generative grammars.

### Regular languages

- Can be represented using DFA, NFA, regular expressions, and regular grammars. e.g. <br> A -> aB <br> A -> a <br> A ->
  e
- A(B C) and AB BC

# 02/27/2023

## agenda

- regular sets (continue)
- Non-deterministic finite automata

### Regular sets

- The intersection, union, complement of two regular <br> are also regular.

# 03/13/2023

## agenda

- Pumping Lemma
- Chomsky Normal Form

## Pumping Lemma

a<sup>n</sup> b<sup>m</sup> is not a regular expression. <br>
push down automata accept context free languages.<br>
all regular languages are context free languages.<br>

## review

Regular languages :

- generated by regular grammar
- defined by a regular expression
- accepted by DFA
- accepted by NFA

### possible question

- give a dfa that accepts the language generate by this regex
- given a DFA give a grammar that generates L(m)
- What is a context free grammar
- what type of production chomsky normal form have.j

#### regular grammar

- V -> aW
- V -> a
- V -> epsilon

#### context free languages

- chomsky normal form
- V -> AB
- V -> a
- V -> epsilon
- context free language if and only if accepted by a push down automata.
- NPDA not equal PDA e.g WW^R (palindrome)

#### conversion to chomsky normal form

- S -> aSb
- S -> AC
- C -> SB
- A -> a
- B -> b

#### pumping lemma for regular languages and context free languages

- There a positive number such that a word in L W <= p can be devided into three parts where |XY| <= p

### Homeworks

#### Homework#1

#### Homework#2

- The string becomes imbalanced which means that the language is not regular

# 04/24/2023

## Agenda

- The halting problem (none solvable problems).
- Turing machines.

### The halting problem

- Jim(Jim) { <br>
  read(Jim) <br>
  while (halt(Jim, Jim))<br>
  } njk - If A is re and if not A is re then A is recursive.

# 05/08/2023

## Agenda

- NP-complete problems
- Satisfiability

### NP-complete

- NP problems are the set of problems that can be accepted by nondeterministic Turing Machine
- P is a subset of NP
- L is NP-complete if and only if is NP-hard and is in the class NP
- L is NP-hard if every language l' in NP is polynomial time reducible to L. This is means given L' there is a
  polynomial time computable function f so that for all x, x in l' if and only if f(x) in L.
- some languages that are NP-hard are not known to be in NP. for example, QBF is NP-hard but not known to be in NP. in
  fact it is complete for PSPACE. it is NP-hard because every instance of SAT is a QBF with just an existential
  quantifier.